docs: add 'services and daemons' (#6264)
snapcore/snapcraft: docs/explanation/services-daemons.rst

.. _explanation-services-daemons:

Services and daemons

> ======================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====================
```

Reviewer: @shaloo this header still is too wide

> When :ref:`creating snapcraft.yaml <explanation-snapcraft-yaml>` to build a new snap, a snap’s executable component can be either exposed as a command or run as a background service or daemon.

Reviewer: We generally prefer to use the term "project file" over "snapcraft.yaml" where possible (this applies to many other places in this document too)

Author: @bepri question for you.
There are lots of instances elsewhere in snap documentation and snapcraft documentation where the file is referred to as "snapcraft.yaml". 

Did you mean I change it 'just here' or across all documentation? 

In fact, as a reader I find it confusing to see some instances in "snapcraft docs" calling it a project file and "snapcraft.yaml" elsewhere in the same doc set. There is no mention of "project file" in snap documentation. It does refer to "snapcraft.yaml" in the published set today, unless the search is misguiding me.

I'd recommend we use  something like "`creating a project file (snapcraft.yaml) < ..." for now until we fix it consistently to project file across both docsets via another ticket. Thoughts?

Author: And thank you for your time for reviewing it, really appreciate it.

Reviewer 2: We used to use "snapcraft.yaml" and switched to "project file".  There may be some references still to "snapcraft.yaml", but @bepri's request is that you use "project file" specifically in the documentation you add in this PR.

> When :ref:`creating snapcraft.yaml <explanation-snapcraft-yaml>` to build a new snap, a snap’s executable component can be either exposed as a command or run as a background service or daemon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When :ref:`creating snapcraft.yaml <explanation-snapcraft-yaml>` to build a new snap, a snap's executable component can be either exposed as a command or run as a background service or daemon.
```
There's a number of these ⭐ Fancy Apostrophes ⭐ in this, could you replace them?

Author: @bepri WDYM fancy apostrophe? That is my apple keyboard's doing didn't realize - will fix. :-)

> When :ref:`creating the project file (snapcraft.yaml)<explanation-snapcraft-yaml>` to build a new snap, a snap's executable component can be either exposed as a command or run as a background service or daemon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When :ref:`creating the project file <explanation-snapcraft-yaml>` to build a new snap, a snap's executable component can be either exposed as a command or run as a background service or daemon.
```

Snap confinement prohibits a system's users and groups from running as traditional services might, such as under a user's ownership. But a user and group named daemon can alternatively be created within a snap to provide similar user and group level control outside of a snap's confinement. See :external+snap:ref:`System usernames <interfaces-system-usernames>` for more details.

See :external+snap:ref:`Service management <how-to-guides-manage-snaps-control-services>` for details on starting and stopping services from the ``snap`` command. Services and daemons can also be managed from within a snap, such as via a hook, with the :external+snap:ref:`snapctl <how-to-guides-manage-snaps-use-snapctl>`.

To set memory and CPU resource limits for a service or daemon, see :external+snap:ref:`Quota groups <how-to-guides-manage-snaps-use-resource-quotas>`.

If you need to add user configurable options to your service or daemon, such as which port it should use, see :ref:`Adding snap configuration <how-to-add-a-snap-configuration>`.

Defining a daemon
-----------------

> To define an executable as a daemon or service, add ``daemon: simple`` to its ``apps`` key:

Reviewer 2: This page feels like a mix of explanation, how-to, and reference. Do you think it makes sense to have it as an explanation?

> .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer 2: We still use "snapcraft.yaml" for the code-blocks captions:

```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml
    :caption: snapcraft.yaml
```

   apps:
     part-os-release:
       command: bin/os-release.sh

>        daemon: simple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml
  apps:
    part-os-release:
      command: bin/os-release.sh
      daemon: simple
```

The value for ``daemon:`` can be one of the following:

-  ``simple``: Run for as long as the service is active - this is typically the default option.

> -  ``oneshot``: Run once and exit after completion, notifying systemd. After completion, the daemon is still considered active and *running*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  ``oneshot``: Run once and exit after completion, notifying systemd. After completion, the daemon is still considered active and running.
```

> -  ``forking``: The configured command calls ``fork()`` as part of its start-up and the parent process is then expected to exit when start-up is complete. This isn’t the recommended behaviour on a modern Linux system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  ``forking``: The configured command calls ``fork()`` as part of its start-up and the parent process is then expected to exit when start-up is complete. This behavior is not recommended on a modern Linux system.
```

> -  ``notify``: Assumes the command will send a signal to *systemd* to indicate its running state. Note this requires usage of the :external+snap:ref:`daemon-notify interface <interfaces-daemon-notify-interface>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  ``notify``: Assumes the command will send a signal to systemd to indicate its running state. Note this requires usage of the :external+snap:ref:`daemon-notify interface <interfaces-daemon-notify-interface>`.
```

> -  ``dbus``: Registers a D-Bus name to notify systemd. Requires bus-name or activates-on to be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  ``dbus``: Registers a D-Bus name to notify systemd. Requires the ``bus-name` or ``activates-on`` keys to be specified.
```

In addition to the above types of daemon or service, the following can be set to help manage how a service is run, how it can be stopped, and what should happen after it stops:

> .. list-table::

Reviewer: This table duplicates a lot of information from the project file reference. I'm not sure how much of a problem that is, though -- I do feel like this presentation adds something. I'm curious what the @canonical/starcraft-authors think.

Reviewer 2: I agree with this sentiment. I wonder if re-organizing the app keys within the project file reference would be worthwhile.  It could be organized into a set of daemon-related app keys and a set of non-daemon-related app keys?

I also think this approach is at odds with the pydantic-kitbash effort.

   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 24 76
   :align: left

   * - Option
     - Description
   * - ``after``

>      - An ordered list of applications the daemon is to be started *after*. Applications must be part of the same snap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - An ordered list of applications the daemon is to be started after. Applications must be part of the same snap.
```

I think this document could be a little more conservative with its use of italics.

   * - ``before``

>      - An ordered list of applications the daemon is to be started *before*. Applications must be part of the same snap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - An ordered list of applications the daemon is to be started before. Applications must be part of the same snap.
```

   * - ``install-mode``
     - Defines whether a freshly installed daemon is started automatically, or whether startup control is deferred to the snap. The snap could then use :external+snap:ref:`snapctl <how-to-guides-manage-snaps-use-snapctl>` with a :external+snap:ref:`hook <reference-development-supported-snap-hooks>`, for instance, or another management agent. Can be ``enable`` (default) or ``disable``.
   * - ``post-stop-command``

>      - Sets the command to run from inside the snap *after* a service stops.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Sets the command to run from inside the snap after a service stops.
```

   * - ``refresh-mode``

>      - Controls whether a daemon should be restarted during a snap refresh. Can be either ``restart`` , ``endure``, (do not restart) or ``ignore-running`` (does not refresh running services to facilitate the refresh app awareness feature). Defaults to *restart* .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Controls whether a daemon should be restarted during a snap refresh. Can be either ``restart`` , ``endure``, (do not restart) or ``ignore-running`` (does not refresh running services to facilitate the refresh app awareness feature). Defaults to ``restart``.
```

   * - ``restart-condition``
     - Defines when a service should be restarted, using values returned from `systemd service exit status <https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.service.html#Restart=>`__. Can be one of ``[on-failure|on-success|on-abnormal|on-abort|on-watchdog|always|never]``.
   * - ``restart-delay``
     - The delay between service restarts. Defaults to unset. See the systemd.service manual on RestartSec for details. Time duration units can be ``10ns``, ``10us``, ``10ms``, ``10s``, ``10m``.
   * - ``sockets``
     - Requires an activated daemon socket, and works with the :external+snap:ref:`network-bind interface <interfaces-network-interface>` to map a daemon’s socket to a service and activate it.
   * - ``socket-mode``
     - The mode of a socket in octal.
   * - ``start-timeout``
     - Optional time to wait for daemon to start. Time duration units can be ``10ns``, ``10us``, ``10ms``, ``10s``, ``10m``.
   * - ``stop-command``

>      - An optional executable command to run before the daemon is stopped, and the daemon is not stopped until the specified *stop-command* terminates. This can be used to gracefully handle a daemon stop or restart, such as when a *refresh* happens, by allowing the daemon to reach a stoppable state first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - An optional executable command to run before the daemon is stopped. The daemon is not considered stopped until the specified command terminates. This can be used to gracefully handle a daemon stop or restart, such as when a refresh happens, by allowing the daemon to reach a stoppable state first.
```

   * - ``stop-mode``
     - Defines which `termination signal <https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Termination-Signals.html>`__ to use when stopping the daemon. Can be one of either ``sigterm``, ``sigterm-all``, ``sighup``, ``sighup-all``, ``sigusr1``, ``sigusr1-all``, ``sigusr2``, ``sigusr2-all``, ``sigint`` and ``sigint-all`` .
   * - ``stop-timeout``
     - The length of time to wait before terminating a service. Time duration units can be ``10ns``, ``10us``, ``10ms``, ``10s``, ``10m``. Termination is via ``SIGTERM`` (and ``SIGKILL`` if that doesn’t work).
   * - ``timer``
     - Declares that the service is activated by a timer and that the app must be a daemon. See :external+snap:ref:`Timer string format <interfaces-timer-string-format>` for syntax examples.
   * - ``watchdog-timeout``

>      - This value declares the service watchdog timeout. For watchdog to work, the application requires access to the *systemd* notification socket, which can be declared by listing a daemon-notify plug in the plugs section. Time duration units can be ``10ns``, ``10us``, ``10ms``, ``10s``, ``10m``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - This value declares the service watchdog timeout. For watchdog to work, the application requires access to the systemd notification socket, which can be declared by specifying the ``daemon-notify`` plug in the ``plugs`` key. Time duration units can be ``10ns``, ``10us``, ``10ms``, ``10s``, ``10m``.
```

   * - ``daemon-scope``

>      - Scope of the daemon. Accepts ``system`` (default) or ``user`` as values. ``system`` runs regardless of user login. Use when the service needs elevated privileges or must run without an active session. ``user`` starts on login, stops on logout. Use for unprivileged services that only need to run within a user session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Scope of the daemon. Accepts ``system`` (default) or ``user`` as values. ``system`` runs regardless of user login, best for when the service needs elevated privileges or must run without an active session. ``user`` starts on login, stops on logout, best for unprivileged services that only need to run within a user session.
```

Daemons and D-Bus

> -------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-----------------
```

> Daemons can be configured to interact with D-Bus in a number of ways. D-Bus can be used to indicate to *systemd* that a daemon is running, it can be used as the mechanism to activate a daemon, and it can be used generally to expose services to applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Daemons can be configured to interact with D-Bus in a number of ways. D-Bus can be used to indicate to systemd that a daemon is running, as the mechanism to activate a daemon, or to expose services to applications.
```

D-Bus activation can only be used for services on the system bus.

Daemon type

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> The ``daemon`` keyword is used to specify the type of a daemon and the mechanism it uses to inform *systemd* that it is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``daemon`` keyword is used to specify the type of a daemon and the mechanism it uses to inform systemd that it is running.
```

Author: @bepri in another comment/edit, you changed 'keyword' to 'key'. So I am going ahead and doing the same here as well after I incorporate your suggestion on styling of systemd (above). Fyi. Thank you.

> A daemon can be configured to use D-Bus to notify *systemd* that it is running by claiming a D-Bus name. This behaviour is enabled by setting the ``daemon`` keyword to a value of ``dbus`` in the app metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A daemon can be configured to use D-Bus to notify systemd that it is running by claiming a D-Bus name. This behavior is enabled by setting the ``daemon`` key to ``dbus`` in the app entry.
```

> Daemons that use D-Bus in other ways that do not need this feature can set the ``daemon`` type to a value other than ``dbus``. This enables other methods to be used to indicate to *systemd* that they are running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Daemons that use D-Bus in other ways that do not need this feature can set the ``daemon`` type to a value other than ``dbus``. This enables other methods to be used to indicate to systemd that they are running.
```

> If the ``dbus`` type is used, either the ``bus-name`` keyword or ``activates-on`` keyword must be used to define a bus name for the daemon. If both keywords are defined, the bus name takes precedence. If only the ``activates-on`` keyword is defined, the last name in its list of slots is used as the bus name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the ``dbus`` type is used, either the ``bus-name`` or ``activates-on`` keys must be used to define a bus name for the daemon. If both keys are defined, the bus name takes precedence. If only the ``activates-on`` key is defined, the last name in its list of slots is used as the bus name.
```

Activation

> ~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~
```

> The ``activates-on`` keyword is used to define a list of names that will be exposed via D-Bus. These names are automatically added to the slots for the snap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``activates-on`` key is used to define a list of names that will be exposed via D-Bus. These names are automatically added to the slots for the snap.
```

This provides a way for a daemon to be started on a D-Bus method call. When a method on any of the names is invoked, the daemon’s ``command`` is run to start the daemon.

General use

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> A daemon that needs to provide services to applications can be configured to use a bus name by setting its ``bus-name`` keyword. This enables the system bus to be used for communication, as with regular system daemons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A daemon that needs to provide services to applications can be configured to use a bus name by setting its ``bus-name`` key. This enables the system bus to be used for communication, as with regular system daemons.
```

> The ``daemon`` keyword does not need to specify the ``dbus`` type for this use case, unless it is convenient to notify *systemd* about start-up by claiming a D-Bus name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``daemon`` key does not need to specify the ``dbus`` type for this use case, unless it is convenient to notify systemd about start-up by claiming a D-Bus name.
```

Daemons that use D-Bus in other ways that do not need this feature can set the ``daemon`` type to a value other than ``dbus``. This enables other methods to be used to indicate to *systemd* that they are running.

If the ``dbus`` type is used, either the ``bus-name`` keyword or ``activates-on`` keyword must be used to define a bus name for the daemon. If both keywords are defined, the bus name takes precedence. If only the ``activates-on`` keyword is defined, the last name in its list of slots is used as the bus name.

Activation
~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``activates-on`` keyword is used to define a list of names that will be exposed via D-Bus. These names are automatically added to the slots for the snap.

This provides a way for a daemon to be started on a D-Bus method call. When a method on any of the names is invoked, the daemon’s ``command`` is run to start the daemon.

General use
~~~~~~~~~~~~

A daemon that needs to provide services to applications can be configured to use a bus name by setting its ``bus-name`` keyword. This enables the system bus to be used for communication, as with regular system daemons.

> As noted above, the ``daemon`` keyword does not need to specify the ``dbus`` type for this use case, unless it is convenient to notify *systemd* about start-up by claiming a D-Bus name.

Author: ```suggestion
The ``daemon`` keyword does not need to specify the ``dbus`` type for this use case, unless it is convenient to notify *systemd* about start-up by claiming a D-Bus name.
